RFC:  introduce RFC process (#550)
vmware-tanzu/cartographer: rfc/rfc-0019-rfc-process.md

- Fill in RFC. Any section can be marked as "N/A" if not applicable.
- Submit a pull request. The pull request is the time to get review of the proposal from the larger community.
- Build consensus and integrate feedback. RFCs that have broad support are much more likely to make progress than those that don't receive any comments.

Once a pull request is opened, the RFC is now in development and the following will happen:

- It will be discussed in a future office hours meeting. Office hours happen on a weekly cadence barring exceptions.
- The team will discuss as much as possible in the RFC pull request directly. Any outside discussion will be summarized in the comment thread.
- When deemed "ready", a team member will propose a "motion for final comment period (FCP)" along with a disposition of the outcome (merge, close, or postpone). This is step taken when enough discussion of the tradeoffs have taken place and the team is in a position to make a decision. Before entering FCP, a super majority of the team must sign off.
- The FCP will last 7 days. If there's unanimous agreement among the team the FCP can close early.

> - For voting, the binding votes are comprised of the maintainer team. Acceptance requires a super majority of binding votes in favor. The voting options are the following: Affirmative, Negative, and Abstain. Non-binding votes are of course welcome. Super majority means 2/3 or greater of binding votes. (Abstentions are not counted in the calculation)

Reviewer: I want to suggest one more step here: at least one of @sclevine, @rawlingsj, or @scothis must +1 for the RFC to be approved. (Eventually, this group could be a named committee with more inclusive membership.)

Reviewer 2: @sclevine wdyt of making use of GitHub teams for that?

<img width="711" alt="Screen Shot 2022-02-07 at 2 09 09 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3574444/152855292-26076f0c-7001-4049-b30a-7929f56bab4f.png">

e.g., have a team that's composed of @sclevine , @rawlingsj , @scothis as part of it so we could block merge based on that team's approval

Author: Updated- I referred to this as the steering committee, but happy to change if there's a better name.

> - For voting, the binding votes are comprised of the maintainer team and steering committee. Acceptance requires a super majority of maintainer votes and at least one steering committee vote in favor. The voting options are the following: Affirmative, Negative, and Abstain. Non-binding votes are of course welcome. Super majority means 2/3 or greater of binding votes. (Abstentions are not counted in the calculation)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For voting, the binding votes are comprised of the maintainer team and Technical Oversight Committee. Acceptance requires a super majority of maintainer votes and at least one Technical Oversight Committee vote in favor. The voting options are the following: Affirmative, Negative, and Abstain. Non-binding votes are of course welcome. Super majority means 2/3 or greater of binding votes. (Abstentions are not counted in the calculation)
```

- changes to a resource's status
- breaking changes
- governance changes
- issues that need more discussion or clarification as determined by the project maintainers

If you submit a pull request or issue that the team deems warrants an RFC, it will be politely closed with a request for an RFC.

## Process

### RFCs

To get an RFC into Cartographer, first the RFC needs to be merged into the repo. Once an RFC is merged, it's considered 'active' and may be implemented to be included in the project. These steps will get an RFC to be considered:

- Fork the repo: <https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/cartographer>
- Copy `rfc/rfc-0000-template.md` to `rfc/rfc-0000-my-feature.md` (where 'my-feature' is descriptive. don't assign an RFC number yet).
- Fill in RFC. Any section can be marked as "N/A" if not applicable.
- Submit a pull request. The pull request is the time to get review of the proposal from the larger community.
- Build consensus and integrate feedback. RFCs that have broad support are much more likely to make progress than those that don't receive any comments.

Once a pull request is opened, the RFC is now in development and the following will happen:

> - It will be discussed in a future community meeting. Community meetings happen on a weekly cadence barring exceptions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- It will be discussed in a future office hours meeting. Office hours happen on a weekly cadence barring exceptions.
```

David has hoped to keep RFCs to Office Hours

- The team will discuss as much as possible in the RFC pull request directly. Any outside discussion will be summarized in the comment thread.
- When deemed "ready", a team member will propose a "motion for final comment period (FCP)" along with a disposition of the outcome (merge, close, or postpone). This is step taken when enough discussion of the tradeoffs have taken place and the team is in a position to make a decision. Before entering FCP, a super majority of the team must sign off.
- The FCP will last 7 days. If there's unanimous agreement among the team the FCP can close early.

> - For voting, the binding votes are comprised of the maintainer team. Acceptance requires a super majority of binding votes in favor. The voting options are the following: Affirmative, Negative, and Abstinence. Non-binding votes are of course welcome. Super majority means 2/3 or greater.

Reviewer 3: Say 5 maintainers abstain, 2 vote Affirmative and 1 votes Negative.

Do the Affirmatives carry the day?

From a Robert's Rules of Order explainer:

> Abstentions are instances in which members who are present refuse to vote. In the usual
situation where either a majority vote or a two-thirds vote is required, abstentions are not counted
and have no effect on the result. However, if the vote required is a majority or two-thirds of the
members present, an abstention has the same effect as a “no” vote.

Author: Above it says:
> Anyone who chooses not to actively partcipate in any RFC is presumed to trust their colleagues on the matter.

I had assumed based on that that yes, the 2 affirmatives would carry the day. Do you think it should be different? Or that this should be called out explicitly?

Reviewer 3: I assumed the same as you, and wanted to get that captured in writing so that any future disagreement would have a paper trail to provide resolution.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- For voting, the binding votes are comprised of the maintainer team. Acceptance requires a super majority of binding votes in favor. The voting options are the following: Affirmative, Negative, and Abstain. Non-binding votes are of course welcome. Super majority means 2/3 or greater of binding votes. (Abstentions are not counted in the calculation)
 ```

> - If no substantial new arguments or ideas are raised, the FCP will follow the outcome decided. If there are substantial new arguments, then the RFC will go back into development.

Reviewer 3: An RFC is in FCP. A maintainer raises a new concern. Does the RFC go into development automatically? Does the maintainer open a second motion for the RFC to go into development?

This sounds like a process that we'll need to specify now or figure out ad-hoc.

Author: I think we can figure that out ad-hoc. If a maintainer raises such a significant concern that others are swayed, i think this will likely cause it to go back into development. If others disagree and quickly convince the maintainer it isn't a concern, it will stay in FCP.

Once an RFC has been accepted, the team member who merges the pull request should do the following:

- Assign an id based off the latest available number.
- Rename the file based off the id inside `rfc/`.
- Fill in the remaining metadata at the top.
- Commit everything.

### Status Field
The status field in the meta section has the following acceptable values:
- **Draft**: The maintainer team has not yet approved the RFC. Edits are still being made.
- **Approved**: The maintainer team has approved the RFC and is accepting PRs for its implementation.
- **On Hold**: The maintainer team has approved the RFC, but PRs are currently not being accepted for its implementation. A reason must be provided in the RFC.
- **Superseded**: The maintainer team has approved the RFC, but it is replaced by another RFC.

RFCs that are rejected will no longer be pulled into the `rfc/` directory.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

Though RFCs are intended to be lightweight, this introduces extra process than what we're doing today. The additional work may make consistency hard.

> 

Reviewer 3: An additional drawback:
In not archiving rejected/unapproved RFCs, Carto may lose context of past discussions and decisions. Sometimes a decision not to do X can be as significant as the decision to do Y.

Author: That's fair. I think those could be found by looking at past PRs with the `rfc` label so we wouldn't lose that context but I hear it's a little less visible.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In not archiving rejected/unapproved RFCs, Cartographer may lose context of past discussions and decisions.

```

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

- Stick with the current process, which is not well-defined, does not include a formal voting on approval of RFCs, and does not clearly indicate whether RFCs are in draft, accepted, rejected, or implemented. This makes it hard for new people to know how to propose changes, and how things are decided. It also makes it hard to track major changes to the project.

# Prior Art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

The basic format of RFCs was [invented in the 1960s by Steve Crocker](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Request_for_Comments#History). The current RFC process has been derived heavily from [Buildpacks](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/). Many other open source projects have adopted an RFC process:

- [Rust](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs)
    - FCP lasts 10 days
- [Ember](https://github.com/emberjs/rfcs)
    - FCP lasts 7 days
- [Yarn](https://github.com/yarnpkg/rfcs)
    - FCP lasts 7 days
- [React](https://github.com/reactjs/rfcs)
    - FCP lasts 3 days
- [IETF](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2026.txt)

# Unresolved Questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

- What clearly defines a "substantial" change?

> - How long should the Final Comment Period be?

Reviewer 3: I think you've answered these questions in the RFC, I'm happy with those answers.

> # Unresolved Questions
> [unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions
> 
> - What clearly defines a "substantial" change?
> - How long should the Final Comment Period be?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

- The team will discuss as much as possible in the RFC pull request directly. Any outside discussion will be summarized in the comment thread.
- When deemed "ready", a team member will propose a "motion for final comment period (FCP)" along with a disposition of the outcome (merge, close, or postpone). This is step taken when enough discussion of the tradeoffs have taken place and the team is in a position to make a decision. Before entering FCP, a super majority of the team must sign off.
- The FCP will last 7 days. If there's unanimous agreement among the team the FCP can close early.

> - For voting, the binding votes are comprised of the maintainer team and steering committee (to be created, initially consisting of @sclevine, @rawlingsj, and @scothis). Acceptance requires a super majority of maintainer votes and at least one steering committee vote in favor. The voting options are the following: Affirmative, Negative, and Abstain. Non-binding votes are of course welcome. Super majority means 2/3 or greater of binding votes. (Abstentions are not counted in the calculation)

Reviewer 4: RFCs should be timeless. It's better to create a team with the individuals listed and reference that team from here.

Author: Fixed, thanks.
